From a web development standpoint,
Docker Compose is definitely one of the more exciting pieces of Docker.
It's a great way to automatically manage the lifecycle of your application
in the development environment and get it up and running,
and stop it, and things like that very,
very quickly, and that's what we're going to talk about in this first section.
The logo really kind of gives away a lot about what it does.
It allows you to have multiple images and then convert those
images into containers. Now to do that, though, by hand,
which we've pretty much been doing throughout the course up to this point,
we've been going into the command line and having to do a manual docker run,
and you can see that with a lot of containers that can be a little bit
problematic and definitely not very efficient or productive.
So the image that you see here from their logo reflects exactly what it does.
It allows you to manage multiple containers and the overall lifecycle.
Now, if you go look at the official docs,
they'll highlight four main areas that it works well. And it's
great for the development environment, staging, maybe for
production, Docker has some other options you could use there
for DevOps like Docker Cloud,
but definitely in the development environment it can do these types of things.
So as mentioned,
it manages the entire application lifecycle, and
that includes things like starting, stopping,
rebuilding, what they call services.
And you're going to see that a service really becomes a running container.
So we're still going to be using images behind the scenes that get converted
into running containers, but we're going to call those services in the world of
Docker Compose, as you'll see as we dig in deeper.
It also allows us to view the status of running services,
including the log output of all those running services very easily.
You don't have to do a command per container to get the
logs, you can actually get to all the different container
logs at once if you'd like.
Now, if you do want to get to one container and do a one‑off operation,
you want to maybe view the logs for it,
or just start and stop that one container or even build it
from the image standpoint, then Docker Compose will let you
do that as well, so it's a really,
really nice way to manage different containers in an app
that you're going to be working with.
Now, let's talk about the need for Docker Compose.
This gives you some high‑level kind of 10,000‑foot level stuff,
but let's dive in a little bit more here.
So let's assume that we have a setup in a web app where we have nginx on
the frontend, and that's a reverse proxy, we have Redis for caching on
the backend, and MongoDB as our data storage,
let's assume, and the nginx when a request comes in,
let's assume that it also is going to route that into different Node.js servers.
Now, again, you could substitute your chosen framework, it could be PHP, ASP.NET,
Java, whatever it may be here. Now,
as these servers get called, they'll of course call into the database,
they'll more than likely then cache some of that data in Redis,
and then that's kind of how it proceeds. Now, what's nice,
though,
is Docker Compose can manage all of these. And you'll see that we have
six different containers in this particular case,
and you could certainly have a lot more if you have other application
servers and things going, and managing those by hand,
I don't know that I want to do that.
It's a little bit problematic, like I said,
not very efficient, not very productive.
So Docker Compose has a file that we're going to be talking about
called docker‑compose, and it's a YAML file.
So if you're new to it, don't worry, it's a super, super simple format.
And in this file,
you can define all these services and even the
relationships between the services.
If you remember earlier in the course we talked about linking,
and we also talked about networking or bridge networks, and we're going to talk
about that as well here as we dive into this docker‑compose.
So what we're ultimately going to be after here is we're
going to make a docker‑compose file that can manage the
different application services.
Now,
the services in this case would be the nginx, the Node. the
Redis, the Mongo, really they're just containers,
of course,
at runtime. but in this world of Docker Compose we're going
to call and refer to them as services.
Now the standard workflow, once you have your Docker files set up,
if you have custom Docker files, and your docker‑compose.yml file, is
you're going to use Docker Compose to then build your services. Now
under the covers that's just going to create images like we've been
doing all throughout the class.
From there,
we can then use Docker Compose to start up our
services, and then when we're done,
we can tear down those services, and stop the containers, and even remove
them if you'd like. Throughout the rest of this module,
we're going to be talking about these different aspects of the Docker
Compose workflow, and we're going to start off,
for instance,
by talking about the docker‑compose.yml file and how you can work with that.
Then we'll move into some of the Docker Compose commands that you can run,
and then we'll jump into some actual examples of using it and applying it to a development environment.